[Applause]
next thursday is the big day next
Thursday
okay every day is a big day but the next
Thursday is a bigger day than some I'm
sorry this Thursday what did I say well
you know that different countries say
next in a different way so yes the
Thursday of this week okay so let me
correct that I said it in a European way
okay
but I'm glad I'm glad you know that I
don't have to tell you okay settle down
don't you wish it were next Thursday
though but well you shouldn't have
corrected me okay
so the exam will be here for everybody
except for the students of Dario if your
pH name is not Dario you should be here
and if you don't know the name of your
TA then you shouldn't be here you know
by now you should remember the name of
your TA and this concerns only students
of which attend the sections of Dario
two sections and they will meet in a
different place okay now there is a lot
of information which I have posted on
online on my on the class homepage which
you have a link on this page this place
is really the master the master page
from which you have a link to everything
okay so in particular you have
information about the midterm exam you
have the mock midterm exam you have
review problems okay and after the class
today I will post the solutions to the
to the review problems for the midterm
exam as well as the solutions to the
last homework assignment okay
now just what I mention want to
emphasize one thing which I already
mentioned last time which is which is
that you will be allowed to have one
page of formulas like before standard
size and one on one side okay is exactly
the same drill
don't use the one which you use last
time because that would make it two
sided right I mean if you you can use
whatever you want you can even write
your favorite poetry for inspiration as
long as it's handwritten and on one side
of a standard sized sheet of paper
alright but don't use your oh don't take
your old cheat sheet and then write on
the back that's not acceptable okay any
questions about the logistics I'm sorry
yes if there is if you have room on on
the same side yes sure but don't try it
on up on the back of the of the cheat
sheet that you have before it has to one
side should be empty should be blank
written with invisible ink perhaps any
other questions about the logistics
everybody is very excited about the
Thursday Lister's the next Thursday okay
no more questions alright so today we'll
have you have a question alright how is
what how is the class code it's all
explained here
well it's not strictly speaking question
about the upcoming midterm okay but so
let me just say this if there is a
difference between sections we will make
we will make adjustments for this okay
don't worry about my experience though
is that it almost never happens because
the way it's set up the way it's set up
is is it's set up in such a way so it's
not to not to let that happen okay so
don't worry everybody is in the same
minister in the same boat everybody
sings in the same position and on equal
footing okay the question was about
quizzes how who is this
the different sections how are they
going to be accounted if there's a
difference and I said that if there is a
difference in quiz scores in different
sections we'll make adjustments for it
but my experience that almost never
happened because we actually take the
cautions for that all right now review
review of the material for the for the
midterm we will be the midterm will
cover the material after the first the
first interim exam this is not to say
that you should forget everything you
knew before the first midterm okay
because of course some of that material
will be easy used implicitly we are
building on a lot of things that we've
learned before the first midterm like
equations of planes equations of lines
and things like that parametric curves
and so on okay but there will be no
focus on the material before the first
midterm in other words there wouldn't be
a problem which is can be solely solved
by means of the material that supposed
to learn before the first midterm yes
you wouldn't need to like parameterize
if if that if that is something which
was covered which was discussed after
the first midterm then perhaps yet but
not in a way it was discussed before the
first midterm and you see what I mean
all right okay so now let me go over
this material let me summarize it and
kind of given an overview as I said many
times you can break calculus into two
big parts differential calculus and the
integral calculus or integration
calculus which are in some sense are
opposite to each other okay and so this
material that we are talking about now
can also be broken into two big parts
one is about differential calculus
differential cultures and the other one
is integral calculus differential
calculus was we came first we first
talked about that and then we the most
recent lectures we devoted to the
integral calculus let me first talk
about the differential calculus what are
the main points here that you need to
know okay the first one is directional
derivative in the direction of the root
if you have a function in two variables
and you pick the point then you have
many different derivatives that you can
take of this function at this point the
derivatives are parametrized by the
choice of a direction vector and a
direction vector which we usually denote
by U as two components a B is the unit
vector which is to say that it's norm or
length which is just you know a squared
plus B squared square root is one
and the directional derivative of the
function f with respect to such a vector
at this point is can be given but in the
ER by different formulas but the one
which we use the most is the formula as
a dot product between you and another
vector which is determined by the
function and the point which is called
the gradient vector what is the gradient
vector it's a vector which has two
components and the first one is the
derivative is a partial derivative of
this function at this point with respect
to X and the second one is derivative
with respect to Y so we put we put two
partial derivatives together as
components of a vector and that's what
we call the gradient vector and the
direction derivative is best understood
as the dot product between that gradient
vector and the direction vector which in
the usual sense okay so what can we
learn from this formula so first of what
is the meaning of the directional
derivative the meaning is it gives us
the rate of change rate of change of a
function f at the point x0 y0 in the
direction of u in the direction of u
and from this formula we can find
various I can obtain information about
[Applause]
about the directional derivative for
example we can find out in what
direction we can achieve the maximum
possible rate of change or the maximum
possible direction derivative so the
maximal maximum value for the
directional derivative is achieved when
we take vector U to be to go in the
direction of the gradient now naively we
would just say that it is equal to the
gradient but we don't want to do that
because this is not necessarily a unit
vector and we have the convention is
that the direction of the direction
vector is called the direction vector
the direction vector has to be unit
vector so what we need to do is we need
to normalize this we have divided by the
length of this I'm skipping the x0 y0
just to simplify notation so we have to
divide by the length if we divide by the
length the resulting vector will have
length 1
so it would be unit vector so that
that's the maximum value maybe I should
say maximum value is achieved just if u
is equal to this and what is that value
and the direction derivative with
respect to this U is equal to just the
absolute value of norm the norm of the
gradient vector because when you take
the dot product you are going to get in
the numerator the square of the norm and
then you divide by the norm so you'll
end up with a norm okay that's the
maximum value a minimum value minimum
value is when we take the opposite
direction which it kind of makes sense
you achieve the steepest ascent in one
direction and steepest descent will be
achieved in the opposite direction so
this will be minus
okay and what is the value is is going
to be - not low and finally you can get
zero value zero if you is perpendicular
it is clear perpendicular to the
gradient vector by the way how do you
find the perpendicular vector suppose
you have a vector a B and you want to
find a vector which is perpendicular to
it we just take negative B a right
because then if you multiply you take
the dot product you get negative B a
plus B a I'm cheese here so it's a very
simple rule to find a perpendicular but
of course keep in mind that we are
finding the proof we are so what we need
to do here to find you we have to take
the the gradient let's call it alpha
beta because I don't want to confuse it
with you itself okay and so we just
switch switch them and put a negative
sign in front of one of them and and but
then you have to normalize it so you
have to you have to divide it by the
square root of a so clear and press make
this cool but so for the maximum and
minimum there is the unique solution
it's a it's the gradient vector divided
by the norm and - project vector divided
by its norm but for the direction for
which the derivative is zero there are
two solutions because that - if this is
you then you have two different sorry if
this is nabla nabla F this is number 11
the two there are two vectors which are
unit vectors and perpendicular to
this one and this one as if you won and
this is YouTube so if you have a
question on the test which to find the
directions in which the direction
derivative is equal to zero you have to
give two answers right you have to give
this one in this one so in fact it's
this vector and it's negative once - for
both of these the dot product is zero
okay and we talked about the meaning of
Direction derivative what it represents
with the thread rate of change and the
fact that there's the gradient vector
the vector of steepest descent is
actually vector perpendicular to the
level curve which brings us to two
another to the next the next topic which
is tangent tangent and normals two level
curves and surfaces level curves and
surfaces so a level curve is a is a
curve on the plane which is given by the
equation f of XY equals some K so that's
level curve right and the level surface
is something like this but when you have
three variables so it's a surface in
three-dimensional space
this is level surface in both cases K is
a number so it this is a number and you
look at all solutions for example if FX
f is x squared plus y squared this will
this will represent circles if K is
positive and likewise if you here say if
you have x squared plus y squared plus Z
squared this will be sort of the spheres
centered at the origin and so now
suppose you have a point on this on this
level curve
rather surface and we could talk about
tangent lines and tangent tangent lines
here a tangent line here normal lines in
both cases so x0 y0 is a point on this
level curve right so then the normal
vector normal vector is the gradient
vector so this is closely related in
fact with the discussion of the rate of
change or directional derivative because
the best way to think about level curves
is to think in terms of maps on the maps
usually are oftentimes you have this
curves and we kind of really used to
this it gives us a good understanding of
the over the landscape because each
curve corresponds to you know the points
of equal height over the sea level and
so you can think of this as a picture of
a mountain and and a climber could be
somewhere here and function f would be
the contour of the mountain more
precisely the graph of the function f
would be the entire contour of the
mountain which would be something like
this and here we're just looking at the
level curves of that of that mountain
right so so finding Direction derivative
would be a question of finding how
quickly a climber would be climbing or
descending if he or she were going in a
certain direction so that would be
vector u so u useful for given vector u
you can ask what is the rate of change
of the what is this what is the rate of
climb and of course from this point of
view it's clear how you would achieve
the highest the steepest ascent the
steepest climb exactly if you would go
perpendicular to the level curve and so
a vector perpendicular to the level
curve either is a gradient vector
and or if you want to sleep as dissent
it would have to be negative its
negative right so that's not life and so
everything is consistent because we know
from the just algebraically from this
calculation we know that the maximum
rate of change maximum directional
derivative is achieved in the direction
of the gradient and geometrically we
know that the gradient is a normal or
perpendicular vector to the level curve
so both of those two those two
statements fit very well together right
because intuitively it's clear that you
will achieve the maximum rate of change
precisely as you blow perpendicular to
the to the level and also if you zero
level the zero directional derivative
would correspond going along the map
along the slope which would be parallel
parallel to the slopes it would be
perpendicular to the to the gradient so
if you have this picture in mind then
all of this becomes really real not
abstract material very concrete ok so
what would it mean it is a normal vector
so for example you can be asked what is
it write down the equation of a normal
line to the to the level curve so you
can write the equation of the normal
line just simply by any usual in a way
which we learn before the very beginning
of this course right so the equation of
normal line would be the easiest would
be to write it in in parametric form so
sometimes you might be asked to
parameterize something but in
conjunction with sort of some higher
math if you will
finding a greater gradient vectors and
normal normal lines so that would be x0
class let's say this is alpha beta as
before so this will be alpha T and then
this will be y 0 plus beta T and also
you can write it can be asked to write
the equation of the tangent of the
tangent line which you can easily write
by using this information and likewise
here too if you have function in three
variables you also have the grade
vector which now has three components
right so it's f sub X F sub y and X sub
need and evaluated at those points and
this is again the normal vector and so
for example again you can be asked to
write the equation of the normal line
and you do it in exactly the same way as
here and you can also be asked to write
the equation of a tangent plane and the
equation of a tangent plane would be
simply F sub X times X minus x0 plus F
sub y y minus y0 plus F sub Z Z minus
v-0 so here we kind of encroach on on a
territory of the previous of a previous
midterm because at the very end of the
that of that segment of the course just
before the first midterm we discussed
the differential and the tangent lines
to graphs of functions and this can be
viewed as a special case of this finding
tangent planes to general level surface
tangent plane to the graph to this to
the level surface
so in fact I devoted quite a bit of time
at one of the lectures from doing about
months ago
explaining the connection between
tangent line tangent planes for level
surfaces in general and tangent planes
to grab some functions and at that time
I explained that that that graph respond
to a very special case of level surfaces
the case where let me erase there's
something
so for graph graph to graph f is equal
to some function f of X Y right this way
you have a function in three variables
which in fact is determined by a
function two variables F X Y minus D so
the level surface for this simply
corresponds to Z equals f of X Y so it
gives you the graph of the function f
capital and so being a special case you
can start you can also use the general
formula to describe the tangent plane
and so what will happen is that here
you'll get negative 1 so this will be in
this special case it will be negative 1
so the equation will simplify ok so
that's what you need to know essentially
by the way when I talk about rate of
change in the restaurant ridges here I
talk about functions in two variables
but in fact the same analysis can be
applied to function in three variables
you just need a unit vector in three
space as you write and then you can the
same formula would define the direction
derivative for a function in three
variables again it will involve the
gradient which is now given by this
formula with three components and so on
and again the maximum will be achieved
in the direction of the gradient the
minimum in the opposite direction and so
on okay there will be more than two
vectors now for the last condition there
will be whole variety of vectors which
are freaking dick Euler to to the
gradient any questions about this yes
okay suppose that F is given by this
formula in this case that what is what
is F sub Z the parts with respect to Z
is negative one right so that means in
this case the equation for the tangent
plane will be like this where instead of
this you just have negative one so it
will then take the usual form Z equals D
minus D 0 is equal to this that's the
formula for the equation of the tangent
plane to grab a function which we
studied just before the first midterm so
I might be it's a good idea to review
that just in case because it's even
import it's an important special case of
this story it was kind of a slightly
unnatural break being on the first
midterm came just after we did this but
before we talked about tangent planes to
general surfaces so it's it probably
makes sense you'd probably be good idea
to review those couple of sections just
before the first midterm ok
any other question I'm a little pressed
on time so I'm a little worried that I
will not be able to if I do that I would
be not be able to talk about some topic
so if I have time left and I'll come
back to this ok all right so what's next
next next big topic here is is Maxima
minima
maximum of functions and this can be
viewed as an application of the of the
differential calculus so what is what we
need to know here first of all you have
to remember that there are there are two
types of maxima and minima that local
ones and global ones and there is a
totally different game finding the local
ones and finding the global ones so
let's talk about the local first the
local ones are the ones which are just
kind of little bumps could be just
little bumps they're not necessarily
kinda Mongiardo you know or a big
mountain could be just a little bump
somewhere on the street that's a that's
a local that's what the local maximum is
or likewise minimum a little bit you
know so in other words that is the value
at that point should be greater than
values that even in a very very small
neighborhood at that point and that's
where we can do well by simply by by
simply applying derivatives and by
analogy with one dimensional case so
that the first the first criterion that
we have for having a local maximum and
minimum is the the first derivative
criterion simply put it is saying the
following that's supposed or if f of X Y
as local as local maximum or minimum so
there is a word for this extremal
extreme-o-saur plural with extrema so
let's call it extreme on because
otherwise I have to say always a maxima
minima Maxima minimum and it's too much
so as local extremum
at some point x0 y0 and it's partial
derivatives partial derivatives at this
point exist exist then they have to be
equal to zero I have to call you so this
is the first this is the first test in
other words if it is a local minimum or
maximum and the partial derivatives
exist then they both have to vanish the
converse however is not true with both
partial derivatives vanish it does not
mean that it is a local maximum minimum
you have questions yeah I knew I knew
that it's always the case I try to save
some space but then I have to go over
the cancer I lose more time right on
more space so I mean the two partial
derivatives this FX let's just do it the
right way that better
okay so converse is not true it could be
which we discuss even in one dimensional
case think of the y equals x cubed
function X cube has vanishing derivative
but the graph looks like this the point
zero is not it's not the point of
maximum or minimum but there is the test
[Applause]
which involves second derivative so
there is a second derivative derivative
yes namely we form at the following
quantity we take the X x0 y0 times FY y
x0 y0 minus F X Y this assuming of
course that all of this exists all of
the derivatives exist and are continuous
at this point so the test is the
following that if G is greater than if G
is greater than 0 and F X F at x0 y0 is
greater than 0 then it's a minimum then
ok I'm abbreviating and x0 y0 is minimal
if B is greater than 0 and F F let's say
less than 0 the maximum the maximum i
mean 0 y0 is local local local local
minimum local Max and if G is less than
0 then it's what's called the saddle
point is a saddle point like the saddle
point so neither neither of Maxwell no
minimum
and the saddle is what you get when you
look at the foot is called hyperbolic
paraboloid yes yes it is that's right so
you remember we had this figure one of
kind of defense shiest a quadric surface
that we discussed the hyperbolic
paraboloid which looks like a saddle so
if you go in some direction you fall you
fall fall down but if you go in other
directions you go up so it's neither
maximum nor minimum locally okay so
that's it D is less than zero then that
that's the kind of point you have so
that's how you know it's not but
otherwise if these you know information
of D is zero if these you know could go
either way
okay we didn't talk much about why this
criterion is true I only made a few
comments the point is that to understand
it you should really look at just
quadric surfaces because as we discussed
a function the first approximation to a
function is the linear function in other
words it's a approximated by the first
derivatives and the next level of
proximation is given by quadratic
derivatives so but two functions have
the same quadratic derivatives if they
have the same sort of Taylor expansion
in degrees one and two and the higher
order terms an expansion they don't
really matter locally when you look at
it locally so to understand what's going
on here you should look no further than
just quadratic functions functions which
are polynomials of degree two combine
degree two in x and y and the four such
functions this expression is actually a
number and if you look if you just plug
this formula in this form of some of
your favorite examples like in elliptic
paraboloid and hyperbola eight channels
and this kind of functions you will see
how this criteria how this criteria work
the reason why we choose this
fancy combination of second derivatives
is that the point is that the behavior
of the of the graph is not necessarily
determined by the coefficients of the
polynomial but they are determined by
sort of the main axis when we talked
about quadratic quadratic functions and
quadratic surfaces we talked about the
fact that you can always make a change
of variables to bring it to a nice form
well when you bring it to a nice form
you will get a very simple expression
for the second derivatives and then this
will become so simple for meaning say ax
squared plus dy squared if you bring it
to such a form you will see that this is
a and this is B and this is 0 because
there is no cross term right so for such
a function if F is this function D is
equal to it's just kind of small small
insert here G is equal to a B and so
then you can very easily see what what
those scenario respond to because the
greater than 0 and FX is greater than 0
means that a is positive and B is
positive so we are dealing with with the
paraboloid the graph of this function is
a parabola it is an elliptic paraboloid
which it goes like this so clearly we
have a minimum this case corresponds to
both a and B being negative
so that upside-down parabola maximum and
one it's less than zero it means that
one of them is positive and one of them
is negative and that gives you the
hyperbolic parabola so this is a way to
to understand this criterion by simply
looking at such expression at such
function and then a more general
quadratic function can be always brought
to this form and what tells you what the
G is for for that form is this
expression anyway we don't need we don't
need to get too much into detail of this
criterion you just have to know whether
you have to know this criteria and you
should understand it for this particular
function how it works at a s squared by
dy squared ok so that takes care of of
the local maximum minimum
and in some sense it's a little bit
disappointing because we don't have a
conclusive criteria but the same is true
also for functions in one variable
function fun variables we don't really
have if you just use first and second
derivatives you cannot really make a
conclusive statement in general whether
it has a local maximum in you so it's
not so surprising so what's what's more
kind of pleasant in some sense and
satisfying is the case of global Maxima
minima in this case we can usually find
a complete solution by following a basic
algorithm so let's talk about this
global so global is a global Maxima
minima it's a totally different game
where you are actually given a certain
region say if it's a function in two
variables you are given a region in r2
or if it's a function three variables it
would be a region in r3 and you have to
find points within that region only you
don't care about what happens outside
only within that region where the
function takes the maximum minimum
values right so the algorithm here
consists of essentially two steps
although you can sometimes phrase it as
in terms of two steps and times in terms
of three steps but basically the first
step would be to find global global
extrema first of all you have to find
points in D where both partial
derivatives vanish this has a point
which are suspicious because of the
first of the first derivative criterion
because those could be the points of
local maxima and minima and local maxima
minima could potentially be global
Maxima minima as well right you have to
find all of those points in fact you
don't have to look at in this in this
part of the of the algorithm you don't
have to look at the boundary because the
second part of the algorithm takes care
specifically of the boundary but you
when you write these formulas okay if
you get if you get a point on the
boundary you include it as well why not
and so and the second part is to focus
exclusively on the boundary focus on the
boundary boundary and find extrema on
the boundary on this body find the
extrema of the function function
restricted to to this boundary so here
there are there are basic tube potential
essentially two different ways two
different approaches
if the boundary is linear in other words
if it is given by linear equation like X
equals some something x equals 5 or X
plus y equals 0 you can simply
substitute this equation into the
function and get a function one variable
and then solve the core of the problem
by doing functions in one variable right
so first step first possibility is
boundary is given by linear equations
given by linear equations linear meaning
is just degree 1 in X&Y example let's
say F is equal to x squared plus y
squared and the boundary one one segment
one part of one component four segment
of the boundary of boundary is say X
plus y equals you
well then you can simply express Y in
terms of X y equals negative x and you
can substitute it into this formula so
instead of a function and two variable
which you originally have you will see
that when the function is restricted to
the boundary it effectively becomes a
function one variable namely X so you
get that this restriction restrictions
to this X plus y equal zero is just you
know x squared plus negative x squared
which is 2x squared so you have to
function in two variables but on the
boundary becomes effectively function
one variable if you have a very
complicated way ssin for the boundary
you may not be able to easily express Y
in terms of X or X in terms of Y and
then substitute but if it's a linear
equation you can always Express easily 1
in terms of the other and then you
simply substitute and then the remaining
variable will be the only variable left
you will get a function one variable so
then just solve the problem by using the
methods of the calculus of one variable
which is you just look at it where the
derivative of the function vanishes on
that well in general is not going to be
this entire line it's going to be some
interval on this one right like I said
it's only it's only component of the
boundary generally the boundary is going
to have many components for example
boundary could be could have this as a
component and then it could have part of
a circle is another component so except
of course I didn't draw the right this
is not X plus y equals 0 but it's x
equals y ok let's do it the right way
this is X plus y 0
okay but okay so maybe this is not it's
not about because I don't want to write
it like it's my function is x squared
plus y squared and I want let's just
make it something complicated it could
be something like this right I'm not
saying I'll put exactly this one on the
exam but I'm just saying for the sake of
the argument okay just as an example so
you could have this very simple
component like this when you receive
your function becomes a function one
variable you can choose which one X or Y
you express the other one in terms of
this one the original ones or Y in terms
of X substitute get function one
variable solve the problem namely find
the extreme of the function on this
interval by using methods of one
variable colored one variable that's the
first possibility the second possibility
you have something like this which is
given by a much more complicated
function rather than X plus y it could
be something with higher degrees or even
could be some more complicated functions
altogether in this case this method will
not work because you will not be able to
easily express one variable in terms of
the other in substitute so you have to
use something else that's something else
is lagrange method so I would say this
is what I call 2a so that's the method
that's the easy method and it's some
slightly more complicated method is the
lagrange method Runge method so a glance
method is about so in this case it's
about solving a system of equations so
in this case you your component your
component of the boundary would be given
by by the equation G of XY equals K or G
some function and so you will write the
full equation he will write nabla F
after the function which you try to to
maximize minimize his lambda NAMBLA you
beep and then you also have G of X y
equals key so solve this system and then
of course there is a reason additional
issue which is that they could be
corners there could be a kind of points
which are not smooth on the boundary and
this have to be treated separately I
mean you can think of treating them not
separately but you can think of sticking
them within the context of 2a or 2b
because when you do when you do that you
have to talk you have to take care of
the endpoints anyway or you can just
think of corners as a separate entity or
a completely separate entity and just
put them on the list that they at the
very end but you have to include them
okay so so usually the way I explained
it is if you do the corner the corners
which are corner by corner timing points
which are not smooth points like this in
this case is 2 so basically it boils
down to the following you might have
sort of an easy case where you might
have sort of an easy case where the
boundary smooth
for example boundary could be an ellipse
this is exactly the example which we
studied originally in class in this case
there are no corners there no corners so
you don't have to worry about it you
just do a grunge method here ok but if
you have something like this then you
have corners and you have to take care
of them separately or you can think of
that of taking care of them
as part of analyzing the segments of the
boundary is that clear yes
we'll the grounds pointing to find them
for us that's a very good question
Lagrange will not necessarily find them
for it for us right for exactly the same
reason why core why the end points would
not necessarily be found just from the
in one variable calculus from the
calculating from finding points with it
with derivative zero what was the issue
if you had a function one variable let's
say you have a graph of a function let
me do it in this way you see here it's a
very good illustration because here this
is the maximum point which is also local
maximum so it will catch it in first at
the first step if we were doing it for
one variable function right but this is
a minimum and it's a minimum not because
if the Ridge vanishes it still it the
root is nonzero but because it's the end
point because we can't go any further
likewise here remember we had a
discussion about how there were two
points which were the points where the
level curve of the function f were
tangent level curves of the function f
which in my example back then was a
linear function we're touching work
tangent to the to the level curve to the
constraint to this to this to this curve
right now okay great but what if my what
if my curve ended here what if my curve
was just like this from here here then
okay I would catch this one is the
minimum just like here so it would
actually be given to me by Lagrange but
what about maximum Lagrange would give
me this which is actually not part of
this segment because my picture could be
like this my domain could be could be
like this and what will happen in this
case is that actually the maximum would
be achieved at the corner so that just
just because it's like Runge method it
doesn't mean it doesn't have its own
limitations right it has the same
limitations as other methods that we
have studied which involve derivatives
well it's a very good question it's a
good point yes that's a good question so
the question is do we have to worry
about saddle points and what we're doing
when we are doing global maximum minima
and the answer is no because because
precisely because it's sort of a
different sort of game that we are we
will certainly catch them in in part one
because in part one we are taking we are
just grabbing all the points we can get
where the derivatives at zero so in
particular we'll get a lot of saddle
points in general but I guess I didn't
finish the algorithm at the point is
that of course at the end of the day we
are going to just evaluate our function
at all of this points so the the saddle
points will we'll just get rid of them
in a natural way because they will be
they will just turn out to be the fake
sort of it will not be maximum minimum
right so the maybe I should say that the
end at the end of the algorithm is to
evaluate function a function f at all of
these points and find maximum e
possibly multiple it could be that there
are two different points where you get
the same values so you have to list them
all so if you if the question on the
test is give all the all the moment
maximum minimum of this function on this
domain and let's say this function has
two Maxima two points where it takes the
same maximum value and you only give one
then obviously you will you lose some
points on this because this is not
complete this would not be a complete
answer complete answer would have to
include all of the points with maximum
value as well as points with minimum
value
now there are a couple three key point
here is far as Lagrange method is
concerned which I wanted to emphasize
well first of all I want to stress that
Lagrange method is used in two entirely
different types of problems the first
problem is the problem like I just
described where you have a two
dimensional domain and you want to find
global maximum minimum and then you have
to you have to worry about the interior
of this domain and then you worry about
the boundary and when you get to the
boundary if the boundary is complicated
you have to use Lagrange method right
but there is a different type of problem
altogether where you just are asked to
find maxima minima on on a level curve
in other words you don't you don't have
the interior you don't have the
two-dimensional region with the boundary
but you just have a curve right so in
that case of course you don't need to do
part one you just do the lagrange method
for this curve and that's it see so
that's an important thing to remember
that you have to understand what the
problem is if you are asked to just
analyze the curve you don't have to see
what happens in the interior now in all
of the discussion I assumed so maybe I
will write that Lagrange method one
crunch method can also be used
to find maxima minima on the particle
owner on a curve like this G of X y
equals K so in this case
no there is no interior no interior so
you don't have to do the partial
derivatives on inter and so on just
apply the transmeta today and there are
actually couple of tricky points which
we did not talk about in class but which
were part of some of the homework
exercises which I wanted to draw your
attention to so the three key points are
that two three key points yeah where the
lagrange method does not work in the
best possible way as as explained here
okay and the three key points are the
first of all this works maybe I will
just say it in a 1 1 10 this works well
this works well the method works well if
first of all this curve is bounded if
the curve does not go to infinity this
is actually something we did talk about
in class I did give an example like this
if number 1 the curve is bounded
you see I mean bounded means that it is
it is like this as opposed to you know
something which was infinity what more
precisely bounded means that you can you
can cover it by a sufficiently large a
disk of sufficiently large radius on the
homework there was a it was an extra
kind of a tricky exercise which was X
cube
I think it'll sound like X cubed plus y
cubed equals 1 and it looks the
deceptively simple because it looks
almost like x squared plus y squared
equals 1 so this is bounded right this
is bounded because it's a circle of
radius 1 but this is not bounded so this
is important point and the reason is of
course that see this here you have a sum
of squares and squares are always
positive or 0 so if the sum of squares
is equal to 1 you can see all right all
right
this is the sum of two numbers which are
positive and equals to one so it means
that each of them has to be less than 1
between 0 & 1 and that puts the bounds
of course x and y can only be between 1
and negative 1 right that's why it's
bounded but here you have cubes and cube
could be both positive and negative so X
could go to plus infinity and Y go to
minus infinity as long as they add up to
1 which is easy to find so I'm not going
to try to draw this but this is not
bounded for sure it goes because you
will exit the trial arbitrarily large
and then Y would be just negative of
that so for such a curve all better off
in a sense that it may not have a
maximum or a minimum or it may not even
have either we talked about this right
so so be careful when you apply Lagrange
method for example it is very tempting
say you get two points and it's very
tempting to say that
one of them is the maximum the other one
is a minimum right and that would be
true if interact the the curve is
bounded because on the boundary curve it
has to have a maximum and have to have a
minimum and if you got two solutions or
lagrange method that means one of them
has to be maximum has to be minimally
just evaluated they would have to have
different values and so you will know
which one is which but I think in this
problem I forgot either either there was
only one point you got only one point
which is like wow why do I get only one
point where is it say if its maximum
where the minimum is similar is the
maximum or maybe there were two points
but they had the same value which like
even worse because what does it mean so
the but both maximum minimum does it
mean the function is constant well it's
not constant so the solution of this the
resolution of this paradox is that when
the curve is not bounded which is in
this case when the curve is not bounded
you may not have may not have maximum or
minimum or even you may be situation
where you don't have either so you have
to you have to take this into account
that's number one and there is one more
little trick which is the other thing
that could happen is that in this
equation the equation which we use for
Lagrange in the lagrange method it is
perfectly okay for nabla F to be zero
because that would correspond to the
solution where lambda is equal to zero
right but it can happen also that nabla
G is zero and if la gg0 noble F is not
zero that would respond to lumbrical
infinity so you wouldn't be able to
solve this so this is this is one
remaining possibility which we haven't
really talked about but there was at
least one exercise or homework where
this was the case so you have to also be
careful about this in fact this is at
this point where novel G is zero and
also by this equation still satisfied
there are actually corners they are
actually singular points of the of this
curve so in that sense they kind of get
under the rubric of corners so they have
to be analyzed separately but just
looking at the equation you may not
realize it right way you have to really
visualize
so just keep in mind it if something's
going funny like if the method doesn't
work quite the right way if you get only
one solution or you get two solutions
with the same value of the function see
if the curve is bounded see if there is
the possibility that this is equal to
zero
because you have to include those points
separately and then of course when you
are solving this kind of this kind of
equations you should have to be always
careful when you cancel out things on
both sides of the equation you know that
right
if you cancel things out it means that
they had their nonzero things like
you're dividing by this quantity so you
have to allow for the possibility that
they are equal to zero and this may
actually where this may be where you're
lost solutions are okay I'm purposefully
purposely trying spending more time on
this differential a part of that because
we talked about integrals for the last
what three weeks and this is something
which was came earlier so I kind of
wanted to make more emphasis on on the
on that part by the good news for you
the good news is that you are not
responsible for for the case when there
are two constraints somehow I expected
some more more enthusiastic response
okay okay thank you okay because I was
thinking why am I even bothering saying
this you know maybe they should be
responsible for it no okay okay all
right so in the book that's right but
that's the problem so if you don't know
what you will I meant that it says it's
a problem for for everybody in the book
all right let me let me explain don't
explain it to your neighbor in the book
there at the very end of the chapter on
like section on Lagrange multipliers
there is a discussion of two constraints
because this is called constraint
this is co constrain and and this is
lagrange method for a single constraint
because here we have two variables and
we have we impose one equation or
constraint so we end up with a curve if
we impose the second constraint here
we'll get finite number of points so
it's not interesting finite number of
points there will be no derivatives you
just evaluate at those points and that's
it but if you consider the case of three
variables and what can have you can have
two possible choices you can have a
situation like this where simply you
will just have you know the third
variable that's a single constraint and
to constraint means that you have
another H of X Y Z and then what you
need to do is you need to write lambda
novel G Plus moon ampler H so it becomes
much more complicated and actually did
not put any problems of this type on the
homework and you are actually not
responsible for this so don't so maybe I
shouldn't even mention because now again
now maybe people get more will get more
worried about it but okay just to be
clear okay any questions about this any
way any other questions about maximum
minima yes very good so the question is
if the point is the curve is not bounded
how do we keep its maximum or minimum
well in this example I I forgot already
now but I did this example I think or
something very similar in class and in
that case you just have to look at those
in the neighborhood of this point if you
if you move slightly away from the point
you have found that the function grow or
becomes values or decrease that is
increase or decrease you see and that's
how you know if it if you move a little
bit and the function becomes the value
functions larger okay that's a minimum
and if you move miss you remain so
that's that's how you do it
okay so let's now let's now spend the
remaining time to talk about the
integral calculus this is something
which we have been doing in the last few
weeks but maybe it's a good idea to just
briefly summarize
as well
so what do we need to know about
integrals so we study integrals of two
different kinds double integrals and
their triple integrals right so double
integrals are integrals over over two
dimensional domain of a function in two
variables and triple integrals I found
our integrals of functions in three
variables over three dimensional regions
like like a box like this the interior
of this box so what is the main idea the
main idea is to calculate it by using
nothing but single integrals in other
words in single variable calculus you
spend a lot of time learning how to
calculate integrals of functions in one
variable and there is a very efficient
tool for doing that namely finding
antiderivative what's called the
fundamental theorem of calculus in one
variable or Newton Leibniz formula here
it's a very efficient tool you just have
you have to take the function and you
have to take its antiderivative and
evaluate at the endpoints and that's it
for functions in two variables you
cannot do it you cannot evaluate the
integral in one shot because there is no
antiderivative as such because there is
not a derivative attached there are many
different derivatives so that's why
there are also many antiderivative so in
some sense what we need to do is we need
to take first antiderivative with
respect to the one variable and then
antiderivative with respect to the other
variable that's what we need to do
roughly but there are different choices
we convert to X and then Y or Y and and
X okay and that's what sort of
complicates matter matters but the basic
structure of this calculation is always
the same you break the calculation of a
double integral or a triple integral
into a sequence of single integrals this
call iterated integration you do it
integral expect one variable followed by
integration respect to the other
variable so we talked about
yes a lot and the important point is
here is to find the correct order right
the correct order of integration which
is essentially finding the best possible
way of sort of slicing your say
three-dimensional domain or a
two-dimensional domain in such a way
that the resulting integration will be
will be the easiest to handle okay and
because there's multiple choices right
sometimes you will get something easy
and sometimes you'll get something hard
so if you're getting something which
looks very hard something which involves
antiderivative of some really
complicated function chances are you are
not using the most optimal way I'm
talking about the meter because it's not
my goal on the midterm to put some
really complicated to test your
knowledge of single things integrals
single variable integrals
my goal is to test your understanding
how to calculate double and triple
integrals so if you encounter some
really complicated single integrals try
a different way okay so what are what
are these different ways first of all
changing the order of integration right
[Applause]
so first of all change in the world of
integration this is where you can
already achieve quite a lot
so change you the other integration and
I think that one of the actually one of
the problems on the mock midterm is like
this for maybe not changing although
integration that's number one
so for that you actually say if you are
given an integral which is already given
as an iterated integral you have to
first reconstruct the domain which which
is rip which it represents or
integration over which it represents and
then you have to figure out how to slice
it in a different way to get an integral
in the opposite direction okay so that's
that's the first that's the first trick
and the second trick which is slightly
which is more advanced something which
we studied at the very end last week and
so on is using different using a
different coordinate system
using a different coordinate system so
here that you have you have some basic
coordinate systems basic ones which of
course are you should always keep in
mind and the basic ones are the polar
cylindrical and spherical right so these
are these are always full polar
cylindrical spherical but you see those
is also be able to devise your own
coordinate system by looking at the
problem itself and so this I'm talking
about really the material of last week
so if you look in the book if you look
at the homework of the last homework
exercises you know it is sort of leaps
in your eyes for example you look at the
problem number 19 it says the
integration function the function that
needs to be integrated is X - X - so
number 19 you have X minus 2y divided by
3x minus y and then you have the region
is bounded by lines you know X minus 2y
equals something and 3x minus y equals
something ok so if you look at this you
should be clear to you what other
coordinates that it should use right
this should be your coordinate U and
this should be your port entry because
then everything simplifies first of all
the function becomes u over V the
constraint region becomes you know a box
in U and V and so on so things become
much simpler so usually it should it
should be clear from the context because
if you notice sort of the same pattern
for function and for for the region
chances are you should change variables
you know question
should we simplify based on the balance
or based on the function both now in
this case it's sort of it's almost too
easy right because it's almost too easy
because they are the same they send the
same message right but in fact what if
this was not what if this was more
complicated let's say it was X and this
was why it's not a big deal it would in
Italy to pay off more to simplify on the
basis of the function because instead of
this very complicated thing you will
have just u over V which you can very
easily find 9t derivatives right and
then x and y you can easily express in
terms of U and V anyway so you would
have some variation for region on the UV
plane and you in any case right but but
if if of course if both the boundaries
the bounds and the function involve the
same functions then ok so then it
shouldn't be to eat too difficult to
guess what the for knows what the
variables are yes right well you know
this expression used at your own risk
which means in this case that for
example if the Jacobian is constant is a
number then it's easy because you take
the inverse if the Jacobian is not
constant if you do it in the opposite
direction instead of getting a function
U and V you'll get a function x and y so
first of all you'll have to invert it
and then you'll have to express x and y
in terms of U and V you see and so then
it sort of defeats the purpose of why
why bother why not just do it in the
right way easier I mean for linear for
linear changes of variables like this
it's sometimes it's easier to do it like
you said the question is really the
following to explain the question I
should say what the formula I should
remind you what the formula is so let's
say for functioning two variables it's
like this that you can write it as f
let's say you write X as a function of U
and V and you write Y as a function of U
and V
and then what you do is you substitute
this right and then you write dudv and
then you have this additional factor
which is called the Jacobian I'll just
leave it as a question mark the question
mark is equal to if the Jacobian is d of
XY over G of UV absolute value well okay
I will not write the formula but it's a
formula which was given last time which
is what using a homework and so on so
just the sixth time I will not write it
but the question which was asked just
now is what about what about V you can
also calculate D UV over DX Y and in
fact this is inverse of this this is
inverse of this but understood in the
right way because the point is that this
is a function of U and V and this is a
function of x and y but if you take this
function and substitute x equals
function of UV and y equals UV then it
will become the universe so sometimes it
could simplify matters for you but
something but sometimes not so I would
suggest you're doing it in direct way
like this but here there is a very
important point which is that you have
to put you have to put this absolute
value I think I mentioned it last time
but maybe it may be too briefly so I
want to really really emphasize it by
very very sick you know symbols here so
this is absolute value if
or put in plain English it has to be
positive okay because it could not be
negative because if you're calculating
the integral function 1 for example you
are calculating the area and so that
means that the function whatever you
insert here will have to be positive so
in fact there is a very simple way to
keep track of when this is positive and
when this is not positive when it's
negative
the point is that if you switch U and V
which in the set up which I explained
you can easily do there is no reason to
take u over V or V over u you will get
an opposite sign so you should be aware
of it maybe maybe I should write it I
should write it after all like this
right there is minus s you see if you
switch if you switch U and V you will
have to switch the two rows and if you
switch the two rows you get the negative
sign since we did not keep track which
order you V or V U is the bed is the
right one you can get a positive answer
or negative answer that's why we just
say put absolute value and not worry
about it yes yes sorry will be
responsible for for three variable
change of variables well on the test on
the midterm probably not because it's
involve highly involved
you certainly are responsible for
chemicals but more general probably not
because it it would be a very hard
problem to do in a short period of time
oh there and I have one more gift for
you which is that you're not responsible
for probability also because we didn't
really like it
finally I strike the chord I I feel
all right very good so hold on hold on
so I'm almost done just a couple of
couple more remarks so absolute value
and one other thing which I wanted to
say I said it already last time about
calculating volumes you should really
have a good understanding of what we're
talking about when we talk about volumes
once one more time
you can when you do a double integral
when you do a double integral like this
you are computing the volume of the
region under the graph D equals f of X
so f of X Y ok so if you're asked to
calculate the volume of something and
this something looks like region under
the graph you can do it by double
integral but if you are asked to do to
calculate the volume of some region
which does not necessarily look like you
know region under the graph and when I
say under the graph I put in quotation
marks you know you know what I mean it's
under the graph but above the XY plane
and so on you can also compute it by
doing the integral of the function one
over this so this is the volume this is
the most general formula no general
formula for the volume over here over
region and three-dimensional space is
the triple integral of function one last
time I explained how in the case when
this region is the region under the
graph you can also express it as a
double integral but keep in mind this
difference okay that sometimes the
volume is best found by double integral
and sometimes by a triple integral okay
and then of course you also have
applications of double and triple
integrals to computing the
since center of mass you are not
responsible for the momenta of inertia
in Hertz phone photos like you are
responsible for you should be able to
find the mass or the charr total charge
when you have a region with the density
function as a double or triple integral
you should also be able to find the
center of mass okay these are the
applications of double and triple
integrals any other questions sorry
charge well charge is like math it's
also integral of the density function
okay
all right so we'll have office hours now
so you can have asked me more questions
now